XLS-33d: Compact Fungible Tokens (CFTs) (#109)
XRPLF/XRPL-Standards: XLS-0033d-CFTs/README.md

> <pre>

Reviewer: Folder name should have "CFTs" in lowercase

Title:       <b>Compact Fungible Tokens (CFTs)</b>

> Revision:    <b>1</b> (2022-08-05)

Reviewer 2: I guess technically this is revision `2`, FWIW.

> Revision:    <b>1</b> (2023-05-22)

Reviewer: Revision should be removed

> 

Reviewer: Type: draft should be added

Author:  
             <a href="mailto:fuelling@ripple.com">David Fuelling</a>
             <a href="mailto:nikb@bougalis.net">Nikolaos Bougalis </a>
             <a href="mailto:gweisbrod@ripple.com">Greg Weisbrod</a>
Affiliation: <a href="https://ripple.com">Ripple</a>
</pre>

# 1. Compact Fungible Tokens (CFTs)

## 1.1. Abstract

[Trustlines](https://xrpl.org/trust-lines-and-issuing.html#trust-lines-and-issuing) are a fundamental building block for a variety of XRP Ledger tokenization features, including [CBDCs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_bank_digital_currency) and [fiat-collateralized stablecoins](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/stablecoin.asp). However, as more and more token issuers embrace the XRP Ledger, the current size of each trustline will become an impediment to ledger stability and accessibility.

This proposal introduces extensions to the XRP Ledger to support a more compact fungible token (i.e., CFT) type, along with operations to enumerate, purchase, sell and hold such tokens. 

> Unlike Trustlines, CFTs do not represent bidirectional debt relationships. Instead, CFTs function more like a unidirectional trustline with only one balance, making it simpler to support common tokenization requirements, including even non-monetery use-cases such as tracking reputation points in an online game. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike trust lines, CFTs do not represent bidirectional debt relationships. Instead, CFTs function more like a unidirectional trust line with only one balance, making it simpler to support common tokenization requirements, including even non-monetary use cases such as tracking reputation points in an online game. 
```

Perhaps as important, however, CFTs require significantly less space than trustlines: ~52 bytes for each CFT held by a token holder, as compared to _at least_ 234 bytes for every new trustline (see Appendix 1 for a more detailed comparison).

### 1.1.1. Advantages and Disadvantages

**Advantages**

* Uses a fixed-point balance representation instead of a floating-point representation, yielding the following benefits:
  * CFT balance amounts can easily be added to other ledger objects like escrows, checks, payment channels, and AMMs.

>   * The implemenatation can more reliably and easily enforce invariant checks and explicitly track fees.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Enables reliable and easy enforcement of invariant checks and straightforward tracking of fees.
```

  * Eliminates edge case floating-point math involving very small amounts violating expected equality conditions (e.g., CFTs will never have to deal with cases where `A+B=A` for non-zero `B` or `(A+B)+C != A+(B+C)`). 

> * Simpler conceptual model (truslines and rippling make it harder for developers to reason about the system, which increases the risk of errors or value loss).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Simpler conceptual model (truslines and rippling make it harder for developers to reason about the system, which increases the risk of errors or value loss).
```
```suggestion
* Simpler conceptual model (trust lines and rippling make it harder for developers to reason about the system, which increases the risk of errors or value loss).
```

* The CFTokenIssuance space key (0x007E).
* The AccountID of the issuer.
* The AssetCode of the issuance.

##### 1.2.1.1.2. Fields

**`CFTokenIssuance`** objects are stored in the ledger and tracked in an [Owner Directory](https://xrpl.org/directorynode.html) owned by the issuer. Issuances have the following required and optional fields:

| Field Name          | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------------- |--------------------|-----------|---------------|
| `LedgerEntryType`   | :heavy_check_mark: | `number`  | `UINT16`      |
| `Flags`             | :heavy_check_mark: | `number`  | `UINT32`      |
| `Issuer`            | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `ACCOUNTID`   |
| `AssetCode`         | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `UINT160`     |
| `AssetScale`        | (default)          | `number`  | `UINT8`       |
| `MaximumAmount`     | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `UINT64`      |
| `OutstandingAmount` | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `UINT64`      |
| `LockedAmount`      | ️(default)          | `string`  | `UINT64`      |
| `TransferFee`       | ️(default)          | `number`  | `UINT16`      |

> | `CFTMetadata`       |                    | `string`  | `BLOB`        |

Reviewer 4: why do we have to explicitly name it `CFTMetadata`? could it just be called `Metadata`?

Reviewer 2: I might be misunderstanding the existing code, but `Metadata` is [already defined](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/blob/adf672ff83d473043485f8a48d39bb5ecbd892b5/src/ripple/protocol/impl/SField.cpp#L81) as `UNTYPED`. In our case, we want this to be typed as a `BLOB` or `VL` (I think) -- similar to [sfMemoData](https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/blob/adf672ff83d473043485f8a48d39bb5ecbd892b5/src/ripple/protocol/impl/SField.cpp#L261) (for example).

Reviewer 2: > But should we rename it to CFTokenMetadata?

Yes, I think so (we should be consistent with that naming).

> | `TransferFee`       | ️(default)          | `number`  | `UINT16`      |
> | `CFTMetadata`          |                    | `string`  | `BLOB`        |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `TransferFee`       | ️(default)          | `number`  | `UINT16`      |
| `CFTMetadata`       |                    | `string`  | `BLOB`        |
```

| `lsfCanTrade`              | `0x0010`  | If set, indicates that _individual_ holders can trade their balances using the XRP Ledger DEX or AMM.
| `lsfTransferable`          | ️`0x0020`  | If set, indicates that tokens held by non-issuers may be transferred to other accounts. If not set, indicates that tokens held by non-issuers may not be transferred except back to the issuer; this enables use-cases like store credit. |

With the exception of the `lsfFrozen` flag, which can be mutated via the `**CFTokenIssuanceSet**` transactions, these flags are **immutable**: they can only be set during the **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`** transaction and cannot be changed later.

###### 1.2.1.1.2.3. `Issuer`

The address of the account that controls both the issuance amounts and characteristics of a particular fungible token.

###### 1.2.1.1.2.4. `AssetCode`

A 160-bit blob of data. We recommend using only upper-case ASCII letters, ASCII digits 0 through 9, the dot (`.`) character, and the dash (`-`) character. Dots and dashes should never be the first character of an asset code, and should not be repeated sequentially.

> While it's possible to store any arbitrary data in this field, implementations that detect the above recommended character conformance can and should display them as ASCII for human readability, allowing issuers to support well-known ISO-4207 currency codes in addition to custom codes. This also helps prevents spoofing attacks where a [homoglyph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homoglyph) might be used to trick a person into using the wrong asset code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While it is possible to store arbitrary data in this field, implementations that detect the above recommended character conformance should display them as human-readable text, allowing issuers to support well-known ISO-4207 currency codes in addition to custom codes. This also helps prevents spoofing attacks where a [homoglyph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homoglyph) might be used to trick a person into using the wrong asset code.
```

###### 1.2.1.1.2.7. `OutstandingAmount`

Specifies the sum of all token amounts that have been minted to all token holders. This value can be stored on ledger as a `default` type so that when its value is 0, it takes up less space on ledger. This value is increased whenever an issuer pays CFTs to a non-issuer account, and decreased whenever a non-issuer pays CFTs into the issuing account.

###### 1.2.1.1.2.8. `TransferFee`

This value specifies the fee, in tenths of a [basis point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basis_point), charged by the issuer for secondary sales of the token, if such sales are allowed at all. Valid values for this field are between 0 and 50,000 inclusive. A value of 1 is equivalent to 1/10 of a basis point or 0.001%, allowing transfer rates between 0% and 50%. A `TransferFee` of 50,000 corresponds to 50%. The default value for this field is 0.

###### 1.2.1.1.2.9. `OwnerNode`

Identifies the page in the owner's directory where this item is referenced.

##### 1.2.1.1.2. Example **`CFTokenIssuance`** JSON

 ```json
 {
     "LedgerEntryType": "CFTokenIssuance",
     "Flags" : 131072,
     "Issuer" : "rsA2LpzuawewSBQXkiju3YQTMzW13pAAdW",

>      "AssetCode": "5553440000000000000000000000000000000000",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     "AssetCode": "0000000000000000000000005553440000000000",
```

###### 1.2.1.1.3.3. Removing a **`CFTokenIssuance`** object

A **`CFTokenIssuance`** can be removed using the same approach, but only if the **`CurMintedAmount`** is equal to 0.

###### 1.2.1.1.3.4. Reserve for **`CFTokenIssuance`** object

Each **`CFTokenIssuance`** costs an incremental reserve to the owner account. This specification allows up to 32 **`CFTokenIssuance`** entries per account.

#### 1.2.1.2. The **`CFToken`** object
The **`CFToken`** object represents an amount of a token held by an account that is **not** the token issuer. CFTs are acquired via ordinary Payment or DEX transactions, and can optionally be redeemed or exchanged using these same types of transactions.

##### 1.2.1.2.1 Fields
A **`CFToken`** object can have the following required and optional fields. Notice that, unlike other objects, no field is needed to identify the object type or current owner of the object, because CFT holdings are grouped into pages that implicitly define the object type and identify the holder.

| Field Name            | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| --------------------- |--------------------|-----------|---------------|

> | `CFTIssuanceID`       | :heavy_check_mark: |  `string` | `UINT256`     |

Reviewer 4: should we call it `CFTokenIssuanceID` to make it consistent with rest of the naming?

Reviewer 2: I think that's a good idea. @ledhed2222 can you make that change?

| `Amount`              | :heavy_check_mark: |  `string` | `UINT64`      |
| `LockedAmount`        | default            |  `string` | `UINT64`      |
| `Flags`               | default            |  `number` | `UINT32`      |

###### 1.2.1.2.1.1. `CFTIssuanceID`

The `CFTokenIssuance` identifier.

###### 1.2.1.2.1.2. `Amount`

This value specifies a positive amount of tokens currently held by the owner. Valid values for this field are between 0x0 and 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF.

> ###### 1.2.1.2.1.3. `LockedAmount`

Reviewer 4: is there any use for `LockedAmount` field is the phase 1 implementation?

Reviewer 4: nevermind, this is used for freeze.

##### 1.2.1.2.2. Example CFToken JSON

 ```json
 {
     "TokenID": "00070C4495F14B0E44F78A264E41713C64B5F89242540EE255534400000000000000",
     "Flags" : 0,
     "Amount" : "100000000",
     "LockedAmount : "0"
 }
 ```

#### 1.2.1.3. The **`CFTokenPage`** ledger entry

This object represents a collection of **`CFToken`** objects owned by the same account. It is important to note that the **`CFToken`** objects themselves reside within this page, instead of in a dedicated object entry in the `SHAMap`. An account can have multiple **`CFTokenPage`** ledger objects, which form a doubly-linked list (DLL).

In the interest of minimizing the size of a page and optimizing storage, the `Owner` field is not present since it is encoded as part of the object's ledger identifier (more details in the **`CFTokenPageID`** discussion below).

##### 1.2.1.3.1 Fields

A **`CFTokenPage`** object may have the following required and optional fields:

| Field Name          | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------------- |-----------| --------- |---------------|

> | `LedgerEntryType`   | ✔️         | `string`  | `UINT16`      |
> | `PreviousPageMin`   | ️          | `string`  | `UINT256`     |
> | `NextPageMin`       | ️          | `string`  | `UINT256`     |
> | `PreviousTxnID`     | ️          | `string`  | `HASH256`     |
> | `PreviousTxnLgrSeq` | ️          | `number`  | `UINT32`      |
> | `CFTokens`          | ️ ✔        | `object`  | `TOKEN`        |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `LedgerEntryType`   | ✔️         | `string`  | `UINT16`      |
| `PreviousPageMin`   | ️          | `string`  | `UINT256`     |
| `NextPageMin`       | ️          | `string`  | `UINT256`     |
| `PreviousTxnID`     | ️          | `string`  | `HASH256`     |
| `PreviousTxnLgrSeq` | ️          | `number`  | `UINT32`      |
| `CFTokens`          | ️✔        | `object`  | `TOKEN`        |
```

### 1.3.1 Transactions for Creating and Destroying Compact Fungible Token Issuances on XRPL
We define three transactions related to CFT Issuances: **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`** and **`CFTokenIssuanceDestroy`** and  **`CFTokenIssuanceSet`** for minting, destroying, and updating CFT _Issuances_ respectively on XRPL.

#### 1.3.1.1 The **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`** transaction
The **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`** transaction creates an **`CFTokenIssuance`** object and adds it to the relevant directory node of the `creator`. This transaction is the only opportunity an `issuer` has to specify any token fields that are defined as immutable (e.g., CFT Flags).

If the transaction is successful, the newly created token will be owned by the account (the `creator` account) which executed the transaction.

##### 1.3.1.1.1 Transaction-specific Fields
| Field Name         | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------------ | --------- | --------- |---------------|
| `TransactionType`  | ️ ✔        | `object`  | `UINT16`      |

Indicates the new transaction type **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`**. The integer value is `25 (TODO)`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

| Field Name         | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------------ | --------- | --------- |---------------|
| `Account`              | ️ ✔          | `string`   | `ACCOUNT`    |

The account to create the issuance under.
```

| `lsfCanTrade`              | `0x0010`  | If set, indicates that _individual_ holders can trade their balances using the XRP Ledger DEX. |
| `lsfTransferable`          | ️`0x0020`  | If set, indicates that tokens may be transferred to other accounts that are not the issuer. |

| Field Name    | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------- | --------- | --------- | ------------- |
| `TransferFee` |           | `number`  | `UINT16`      | 

The value specifies the fee to charged by the issuer for secondary sales of the Token, if such sales are allowed. Valid values for this field are between 0 and 50,000 inclusive, allowing transfer rates of between 0.000% and 50.000% in increments of 0.001.

The field MUST NOT be present if the `tfTransferable` flag is not set. If it is, the transaction should fail and a fee should be claimed.

| Field Name      | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| --------------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------- |
| `MaximumAmount` | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `UINT64`      | 

The maximum asset amount of this token that should ever be issued.

> | Field Name | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
> | ---------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------- |
> | `CFTMetadata` | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `BLOB`        | 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Field Name    | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------- |
| `CFTMetadata` | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `BLOB`        | 
```

Arbitrary metadata about this issuance, in hex format. The limit for this field is 1024 bytes.

##### 1.3.1.1.2 Example **`CFTokenIssuanceCreate`** transaction

```
{

>   "TransactionType": "CFTokenIssuanceCreate",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "Account": "rajgkBmMxmz161r8bWYH7CQAFZP5bA9oSG",
  "TransactionType": "CFTokenIssuanceCreate",
```

  "AssetCode": "5553440000000000000000000000000000000000",
  "AssetScale": "2",
  "TransferFee": 314,
  "MaxAmount": "50000000",
  "Flags": 83659,
  "CFTMetadata": "FOO",
  "Fee": 10,
}
```

This transaction assumes that the issuer of the token is the signer of the transaction.

### 1.3.2 The **`CFTokenIssuanceDestroy`** transaction

The **`CFTokenIssuanceDestroy`** transaction is used to remove an **`CFTokenIssuance`** object from the directory node in which it is being held, effectively removing the token from the ledger ("destroying" it).

> If this operation succeeds, the corresponding **`CFTokenIssuance`** is removed and the owner’s reserve requirement is reduced by one.

Author: This is already described in the section on `AccountDelete` - you must destroy any CFTIssuances you have before you can delete your account. Added a statement to the `CFTokenIssuanceDestroy` tx to indicate that you cannot destroy a CFTIssuance if there are any existing holders.

#### 1.3.2.1 Transaction-specific Fields

| Field Name        | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ----------        | --------- | --------- | ------------- |
| `TransactionType` |  ✔️        | `string`  | `UINT16`      | 

Indicates the new transaction type **`CFTokenIssuanceDestroy`**. The integer value is `26` (TODO).

| Field Name  | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ----------- | --------- | --------- | ------------- |

> | `CFTokenIssuance` |  ✔️        | `string`  | `UINT256`     | 

Reviewer 4: should it say `CFTokenIssuanceID`?

Identifies the **`CFTokenIssuance`** object to be removed by the transaction.

#### 1.3.2.2 Example **`CFTokenIssuanceDestroy`** JSON

 ```json
 {
       "TransactionType": "CFTokenIssuanceDestroy",
       "Fee": 10,
       "CFTokenIssuance": "00070C4495F14B0E44F78A264E41713C64B5F89242540EE255534400000000000000"
 }
 ```
 
### 1.3.3 The **`CFTokenIssuanceSet`** Transaction

#### 1.3.3.1 CFTokenIssuanceSet
| Field Name         | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ------------------ | --------- | --------- |---------------|
| `TransactionType`  | ️ ✔        | `object`  | `UINT16`      |

Indicates the new transaction type **`CFTokenIssuanceSet`**. The integer value is `28 (TODO)`.

| Field Name  | Required? | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| ----------- | --------- | --------- | ------------- |

> | `CFTokenIssuance` |  ✔️  | `string`  | `UINT256`     | 

Reviewer 4: ditto

| Field Name      | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| --------------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------- |
| `Account`       | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `ACCOUNTID`   | 

An optional XRPL Address of an individual token holder balance to freeze/unfreeze. If omitted, this transaction will apply to all any accounts holding CFTs.

| Field Name      | Required?          | JSON Type | Internal Type |
| --------------- | ------------------ | --------- | ------------- |
| `Flag`          | :heavy_check_mark: | `string`  | `UINT64`      | 

#### 1.3.3.2 Example **`CFTokenIssuanceSet`** JSON

 ```json
 {
       "TransactionType": "CFTokenIssuanceSet",
       "Fee": 10,
       "CFTokenIssuance": "00070C4495F14B0E44F78A264E41713C64B5F89242540EE255534400000000000000",
       "Flags": 1
 }
 ```
 
#### 1.3.3.1.1 CFTokenSet Flags
Transactions of the `CFTokenFreeze` type support additional values in the Flags field, as follows:

| Flag Name         | Flag Value | Description |
|-------------------|------------|-------------|
| `tfSetFreeze`     | ️`0x0001`  | If set, indicates that all CFT balances for this asset should be frozen. |

> | `tfSetUnFreeze`   | ️`0x0002`  | If set, indicates that all CFT balances for this asset should be unfrozen. |

Reviewer 4: `tfSetUnFreeze` is supposed to be called `tfClearFreeze` instead, if the plan is to re-use `TrustSet` flag constants
```
constexpr std::uint32_t tfSetFreeze                        = 0x00100000;
constexpr std::uint32_t tfClearFreeze                      = 0x00200000;
```

 
# Appendix 1: Current Trustline Storage Requirements
As described in issue [#3866](https://github.com/ripple/rippled/issues/3866#issue-919201191), the size of a [RippleState](https://xrpl.org/ripplestate.html#ripplestate) object is anywhere from 234 to 250 bytes plus a minimum of 32 bytes for object owner tracking, described in more detail here:

```
FIELD NAME          SIZE IN BITS
================================
LedgerEntryType               16
Flags                         32 ("optional" but present in > 99.99% of cases)
Balance                      384 (160–224 wasted)
LowLimit                     384 (160–224 wasted)
HighLimit                    384 (160–224 wasted)
PreviousTxnID                256
PreviousTxnLgrSeq             32
LowNode                       64 (often has value 0)
HighNode                      64 (often has value 0)
--------------------------------
REQUIRED SUBTOTAL:          1872 (234 bytes)

OPTIONAL FIELDS
--------------------------------
LowQualityIn                  32
LowQualityOut                 32
HighQualityIn                 32
HighQualityOut                32
--------------------------------
MAXIMUM TOTAL SIZE:         2000 (250 bytes)
```

> TODO: Validate these numbers as they may be slightly low for truslintes. For example, in addition to the above data, trustlines require two directory entries for low/high nodes that get created for each trustline (i.e., for each RippleState object). This creates two root objects, each 98 bytes, adding 196 bytes in total per unique issuer/holder. Conversely, for CFTs, the page structure allows for up to 32 issuances to be held by a single token holder while only incurring around 102 bytes for a CFTokenPage. Thus, every time an account wants to hold a new token, the current Trustline implementation would require _at least_ 430 bytes every time. If we imagine a single account holding 20 tokens, CFTs would require ~1040 bytes, whereas trustlines would require ~8,600 bytes!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TODO: Validate these numbers as they may be slightly low for trust lines. For example, in addition to the above data, trust lines require two directory entries for low/high nodes that get created for each trust line (i.e. for each RippleState object). This creates two root objects, each 98 bytes, adding 196 bytes in total per unique issuer/holder. Conversely, for CFTs, the page structure allows for up to 32 issuances to be held by a single token holder while only incurring around 102 bytes for a CFTokenPage. Thus, every time an account wants to hold a new token, the current trust line implementation would require _at least_ 430 bytes. If we imagine a single account holding 20 tokens, CFTs would require ~1040 bytes, whereas trust lines would require ~8,600 bytes!
```
